README.md, before:

[![PyPI](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/mqt.core?logo=pypi&style=flat-square)](https://pypi.org/project/mqt.core/)
![OS](https://img.shields.io/badge/os-linux%20%7C%20macos%20%7C%20windows-blue?style=flat-square)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue.svg?style=flat-square)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![DOI](https://img.shields.io/badge/JOSS-10.21105/joss.07478-blue.svg?style=flat-square)](https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.07478)
[![CI](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/ci.yml?branch=main&style=flat-square&logo=github&label=ci)](https://github.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![CD](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/cd.yml?style=flat-square&logo=github&label=cd)](https://github.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/actions/workflows/cd.yml)
[![Documentation](https://img.shields.io/readthedocs/mqt-core?logo=readthedocs&style=flat-square)](https://mqt.readthedocs.io/projects/core)
[![codecov](https://img.shields.io/codecov/c/github/munich-quantum-toolkit/core?style=flat-square&logo=codecov)](https://codecov.io/gh/munich-quantum-toolkit/core)

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://mqt.readthedocs.io">
    <picture>
      <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: dark)" srcset="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/.github/refs/heads/main/docs/_static/logo-mqt-dark.svg" width="60%">
      <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/.github/refs/heads/main/docs/_static/logo-mqt-light.svg" width="60%" alt="MQT Logo">
    </picture>
  </a>
</p>

# MQT Core - The Backbone of the Munich Quantum Toolkit (MQT)

MQT Core is an open-source C++20 and Python library for quantum computing that forms the backbone of the quantum software tools developed as part of the [_Munich Quantum Toolkit (MQT)_](https://mqt.readthedocs.io).

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://mqt.readthedocs.io/projects/core">
  <img width=30% src="https://img.shields.io/badge/documentation-blue?style=for-the-badge&logo=read%20the%20docs" alt="Documentation" />
  </a>
</p>

## Key Features

- Fully fledged intermediate representation (IR) for quantum computations.
- A state-of-the-art decision diagram (DD) package for quantum computing.
- A dedicated ZX-diagram package for working with the ZX-calculus.

If you have any questions, feel free to create a [discussion](https://github.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/discussions) or an [issue](https://github.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/issues) on [GitHub](https://github.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/core).

## Contributors and Supporters

The _[Munich Quantum Toolkit (MQT)](https://mqt.readthedocs.io)_ is developed by the [Chair for Design Automation](https://www.cda.cit.tum.de/) at the [Technical University of Munich](https://www.tum.de/) and supported by the [Munich Quantum Software Company (MQSC)](https://munichquantum.software).
Among others, it is part of the [Munich Quantum Software Stack (MQSS)](https://www.munich-quantum-valley.de/research/research-areas/mqss) ecosystem, which is being developed as part of the [Munich Quantum Valley (MQV)](https://www.munich-quantum-valley.de) initiative.

<p align="center">
  <picture>
    <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: dark)" srcset="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/.github/refs/heads/main/docs/_static/mqt-logo-banner-dark.svg" width="90%">
    <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/.github/refs/heads/main/docs/_static/mqt-logo-banner-light.svg" width="90%" alt="MQT Partner Logos">
  </picture>
</p>

Thank you to all the contributors who have helped make MQT Core a reality!

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/graphs/contributors">
  <img src="https://contrib.rocks/image?repo=munich-quantum-toolkit/core" />
  </a>
</p>

The MQT will remain free, open-source, and permissively licensed—now and in the future.
We are firmly committed to keeping it open and actively maintained for the quantum computing community.

To support this endeavor, please consider:

- Sponsoring us on GitHub: https://github.com/sponsors/munich-quantum-toolkit
- Starring and sharing our repositories: https://github.com/munich-quantum-toolkit
- Contributing code, documentation, tests, or examples via issues and pull requests
- Citing the MQT in your publications (see [Cite This](#cite-this))
- Using the MQT in research and teaching, and sharing feedback and use cases

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/sponsors/munich-quantum-toolkit">
  <img width=20% src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Sponsor-white?style=for-the-badge&logo=githubsponsors&labelColor=black&color=blue" alt="Sponsor the MQT" />
  </a>
</p>

## Getting Started

`mqt.core` is available via [PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/mqt.core/) for all major operating systems and supports Python 3.9 to 3.14.

```console
(.venv) $ pip install mqt.core
```

The following code gives an example on the usage:

```python3
from mqt.core import QuantumComputation

qc = QuantumComputation(2, 2)
qc.h(0)
qc.cx(0, 1)
qc.measure(range(2), range(2))

print(qc)
```

**Detailed documentation and examples are available at [ReadTheDocs](https://mqt.readthedocs.io/projects/core).**

## System Requirements

Building (and running) is continuously tested under Linux, MacOS, and Windows using the [latest available system versions for GitHub Actions](https://github.com/actions/runner-images).
However, the implementation should be compatible with any current C++ compiler supporting C++20 and a minimum CMake version of 3.24.

MQT Core relies on some external dependencies:

- [nlohmann/json](https://github.com/nlohmann/json): A JSON library for modern C++.
- [boost/multiprecision](https://github.com/boostorg/multiprecision): A library for multiprecision arithmetic (used in the ZX package).
- [google/googletest](https://github.com/google/googletest): A testing framework for C++ (only used in tests).
- [pybind/pybind11_json](https://github.com/pybind/pybind11_json): Using nlohmann::json with pybind11 (only used for creating the Python bindings).

CMake will automatically look for installed versions of these libraries. If it does not find them, they will be fetched automatically at configure time via the [FetchContent](https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/module/FetchContent.html) module (check out the documentation for more information on how to customize this behavior).

It is recommended (although not required) to have [GraphViz](https://www.graphviz.org) installed for visualization purposes.

If you want to use the ZX library, it is recommended (although not strictly necessary) to have [GMP](https://gmplib.org/) installed in your system.

## Cite This

If you want to cite MQT Core, please use the following BibTeX entry:

```bibtex
@article{burgholzer2025MQTCore,
    title     = {{{MQT Core}}: {{The}} Backbone of the {{Munich Quantum Toolkit (MQT)}}},
    author    = {Lukas Burgholzer and Yannick Stade and Tom Peham and Robert Wille},
    year      = {2025},
    journal   = {Journal of Open Source Software},
    publisher = {The Open Journal},
    volume    = {10},
    number    = {108},
    pages     = {7478},
    doi       = {10.21105/joss.07478},
    url       = {https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.07478},
}
```

---

## Acknowledgements

The Munich Quantum Toolkit has been supported by the European
Research Council (ERC) under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (grant agreement
No. 101001318), the Bavarian State Ministry for Science and Arts through the Distinguished Professorship Program, as well as the
Munich Quantum Valley, which is supported by the Bavarian state government with funds from the Hightech Agenda Bayern Plus.

<p align="center">
  <picture>
    <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: dark)" srcset="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/.github/refs/heads/main/docs/_static/mqt-funding-footer-dark.svg" width="90%">
    <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/.github/refs/heads/main/docs/_static/mqt-funding-footer-light.svg" width="90%" alt="MQT Funding Footer">
  </picture>
</p>

Commit message:

Move citation information to references page

README.md, after:

[![PyPI](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/mqt.core?logo=pypi&style=flat-square)](https://pypi.org/project/mqt.core/)
![OS](https://img.shields.io/badge/os-linux%20%7C%20macos%20%7C%20windows-blue?style=flat-square)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue.svg?style=flat-square)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![DOI](https://img.shields.io/badge/JOSS-10.21105/joss.07478-blue.svg?style=flat-square)](https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.07478)
[![CI](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/ci.yml?branch=main&style=flat-square&logo=github&label=ci)](https://github.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![CD](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/cd.yml?style=flat-square&logo=github&label=cd)](https://github.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/actions/workflows/cd.yml)
[![Documentation](https://img.shields.io/readthedocs/mqt-core?logo=readthedocs&style=flat-square)](https://mqt.readthedocs.io/projects/core)
[![codecov](https://img.shields.io/codecov/c/github/munich-quantum-toolkit/core?style=flat-square&logo=codecov)](https://codecov.io/gh/munich-quantum-toolkit/core)

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://mqt.readthedocs.io">
    <picture>
      <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: dark)" srcset="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/.github/refs/heads/main/docs/_static/logo-mqt-dark.svg" width="60%">
      <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/.github/refs/heads/main/docs/_static/logo-mqt-light.svg" width="60%" alt="MQT Logo">
    </picture>
  </a>
</p>

# MQT Core - The Backbone of the Munich Quantum Toolkit (MQT)

MQT Core is an open-source C++20 and Python library for quantum computing that forms the backbone of the quantum software tools developed as part of the [_Munich Quantum Toolkit (MQT)_](https://mqt.readthedocs.io).

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://mqt.readthedocs.io/projects/core">
  <img width=30% src="https://img.shields.io/badge/documentation-blue?style=for-the-badge&logo=read%20the%20docs" alt="Documentation" />
  </a>
</p>

## Key Features

- Fully fledged intermediate representation (IR) for quantum computations.
- A state-of-the-art decision diagram (DD) package for quantum computing.
- A dedicated ZX-diagram package for working with the ZX-calculus.

If you have any questions, feel free to create a [discussion](https://github.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/discussions) or an [issue](https://github.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/issues) on [GitHub](https://github.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/core).

## Contributors and Supporters

The _[Munich Quantum Toolkit (MQT)](https://mqt.readthedocs.io)_ is developed by the [Chair for Design Automation](https://www.cda.cit.tum.de/) at the [Technical University of Munich](https://www.tum.de/) and supported by the [Munich Quantum Software Company (MQSC)](https://munichquantum.software).
Among others, it is part of the [Munich Quantum Software Stack (MQSS)](https://www.munich-quantum-valley.de/research/research-areas/mqss) ecosystem, which is being developed as part of the [Munich Quantum Valley (MQV)](https://www.munich-quantum-valley.de) initiative.

<p align="center">
  <picture>
    <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: dark)" srcset="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/.github/refs/heads/main/docs/_static/mqt-logo-banner-dark.svg" width="90%">
    <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/.github/refs/heads/main/docs/_static/mqt-logo-banner-light.svg" width="90%" alt="MQT Partner Logos">
  </picture>
</p>

Thank you to all the contributors who have helped make MQT Core a reality!

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/graphs/contributors">
  <img src="https://contrib.rocks/image?repo=munich-quantum-toolkit/core" />
  </a>
</p>

The MQT will remain free, open-source, and permissively licensed—now and in the future.
We are firmly committed to keeping it open and actively maintained for the quantum computing community.

To support this endeavor, please consider:

- Sponsoring us on GitHub: https://github.com/sponsors/munich-quantum-toolkit
- Starring and sharing our repositories: https://github.com/munich-quantum-toolkit
- Contributing code, documentation, tests, or examples via issues and pull requests
- Citing the MQT in your publications (see [Cite This](#cite-this))
- Citing our research in your publications (see [References](https://mqt.readthedocs.io/projects/core/en/latest/references.html))
- Using the MQT in research and teaching, and sharing feedback and use cases

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://github.com/sponsors/munich-quantum-toolkit">
  <img width=20% src="https://img.shields.io/badge/Sponsor-white?style=for-the-badge&logo=githubsponsors&labelColor=black&color=blue" alt="Sponsor the MQT" />
  </a>
</p>

## Getting Started

`mqt.core` is available via [PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/mqt.core/) for all major operating systems and supports Python 3.9 to 3.14.

```console
(.venv) $ pip install mqt.core
```

The following code gives an example on the usage:

```python3
from mqt.core import QuantumComputation

qc = QuantumComputation(2, 2)
qc.h(0)
qc.cx(0, 1)
qc.measure(range(2), range(2))

print(qc)
```

**Detailed documentation and examples are available at [ReadTheDocs](https://mqt.readthedocs.io/projects/core).**

## System Requirements

Building (and running) is continuously tested under Linux, MacOS, and Windows using the [latest available system versions for GitHub Actions](https://github.com/actions/runner-images).
However, the implementation should be compatible with any current C++ compiler supporting C++20 and a minimum CMake version of 3.24.

MQT Core relies on some external dependencies:

- [nlohmann/json](https://github.com/nlohmann/json): A JSON library for modern C++.
- [boost/multiprecision](https://github.com/boostorg/multiprecision): A library for multiprecision arithmetic (used in the ZX package).
- [google/googletest](https://github.com/google/googletest): A testing framework for C++ (only used in tests).
- [pybind/pybind11_json](https://github.com/pybind/pybind11_json): Using nlohmann::json with pybind11 (only used for creating the Python bindings).

CMake will automatically look for installed versions of these libraries. If it does not find them, they will be fetched automatically at configure time via the [FetchContent](https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/module/FetchContent.html) module (check out the documentation for more information on how to customize this behavior).

It is recommended (although not required) to have [GraphViz](https://www.graphviz.org) installed for visualization purposes.

If you want to use the ZX library, it is recommended (although not strictly necessary) to have [GMP](https://gmplib.org/) installed in your system.

## Cite This

If you want to cite MQT Core, please use the following BibTeX entry:

```bibtex
@article{core,
    title        = {{{MQT Core}}: {{The}} Backbone of the {{Munich Quantum Toolkit (MQT)}}},
    author       = {Lukas Burgholzer and Yannick Stade and Tom Peham and Robert Wille},
    year         = 2025,
    journal      = {Journal of Open Source Software},
    publisher    = {The Open Journal},
    volume       = 10,
    number       = 108,
    pages        = 7478,
    doi          = {10.21105/joss.07478},
    url          = {https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.07478},
}
```

If you want to cite the MQT, please use the following BibTeX entry:

```bibtex
@inproceedings{mqt,
    title        = {The {{MQT}} Handbook: {{A}} Summary of Design Automation Tools and Software for Quantum Computing},
    shorttitle   = {{The MQT Handbook}},
    author       = {Robert Wille and Lucas Berent and Tobias Forster and Jagatheesan Kunasaikaran and Kevin Mato and Tom Peham and Nils Quetschlich and Damian Rovara and Aaron Sander and Ludwig Schmid and Daniel Schoenberger and Yannick Stade and Lukas Burgholzer},
    booktitle    = {IEEE International Conference on Quantum Software (QSW)},
    doi          = {10.1109/QSW62656.2024.00013},
    date         = 2024,
    eprint       = {2405.17543},
    eprinttype   = {arxiv},
    addendum     = {A live version of this document is available at \url{https://mqt.readthedocs.io}},
}
```

---

## Acknowledgements

The Munich Quantum Toolkit has been supported by the European
Research Council (ERC) under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (grant agreement
No. 101001318), the Bavarian State Ministry for Science and Arts through the Distinguished Professorship Program, as well as the
Munich Quantum Valley, which is supported by the Bavarian state government with funds from the Hightech Agenda Bayern Plus.

<p align="center">
  <picture>
    <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: dark)" srcset="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/.github/refs/heads/main/docs/_static/mqt-funding-footer-dark.svg" width="90%">
    <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/.github/refs/heads/main/docs/_static/mqt-funding-footer-light.svg" width="90%" alt="MQT Funding Footer">
  </picture>
</p>
