plugins/catalyst/README.md, before:

[//]: # "TODO: Update the banners"

[![PyPI](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/mqt.core?logo=pypi&style=flat-square)](https://pypi.org/project/mqt.core/)
![OS](https://img.shields.io/badge/os-linux%20%7C%20macos%20%7C%20windows-blue?style=flat-square)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue.svg?style=flat-square)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![DOI](https://img.shields.io/badge/JOSS-10.21105/joss.07478-blue.svg?style=flat-square)](https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.07478)
[![CI](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/ci.yml?branch=main&style=flat-square&logo=github&label=ci)](https://github.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![CD](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/cd.yml?style=flat-square&logo=github&label=cd)](https://github.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/actions/workflows/cd.yml)
[![Documentation](https://img.shields.io/readthedocs/mqt-core?logo=readthedocs&style=flat-square)](https://mqt.readthedocs.io/projects/core)
[![codecov](https://img.shields.io/codecov/c/github/munich-quantum-toolkit/core?style=flat-square&logo=codecov)](https://codecov.io/gh/munich-quantum-toolkit/core)

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://mqt.readthedocs.io">
   <picture>
     <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: dark)" srcset="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/.github/refs/heads/main/docs/_static/logo-mqt-dark.svg" width="60%">
     <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/.github/refs/heads/main/docs/_static/logo-mqt-light.svg" width="60%" alt="MQT Logo">
   </picture>
  </a>
</p>

# MQT Core Catalyst MLIR Plugin

This sub-package of MQT Core provides a [Catalyst](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst) plugin for the [MLIR](https://mlir.llvm.org/) framework.
It allows you to use MQT Core's MLIR dialects and transformations within the Catalyst framework, enabling advanced quantum circuit optimizations and transformations.

TODO: extend this section with more details about the Catalyst plugin, its features, and how to use it.

If you have any questions, feel free to create a [discussion](https://github.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/discussions) or an [issue](https://github.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/issues) on [GitHub](https://github.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/core).

## Contributors and Supporters

The _[Munich Quantum Toolkit (MQT)](https://mqt.readthedocs.io)_ is developed by the [Chair for Design Automation](https://www.cda.cit.tum.de/) at the [Technical University of Munich](https://www.tum.de/) and supported by the [Munich Quantum Software Company (MQSC)](https://munichquantum.software).
Among others, it is part of the [Munich Quantum Software Stack (MQSS)](https://www.munich-quantum-valley.de/research/research-areas/mqss) ecosystem, which is being developed as part of the [Munich Quantum Valley (MQV)](https://www.munich-quantum-valley.de) initiative.

<p align="center">
  <picture>
   <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: dark)" srcset="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/.github/refs/heads/main/docs/_static/mqt-logo-banner-dark.svg" width="90%">
   <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/.github/refs/heads/main/docs/_static/mqt-logo-banner-light.svg" width="90%" alt="MQT Partner Logos">
  </picture>
</p>

Thank you to all the contributors who have helped make MQT Core a reality!

<p align="center">
<a href="https://github.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/graphs/contributors">
  <img src="https://contrib.rocks/image?repo=munich-quantum-toolkit/core" />
</a>
</p>

## Getting Started

`mqt.core.catalyst` is **NOT YET** available on [PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/mqt.core/).

Because `pennylane-catalyst` pins to a specific LLVM/MLIR revision, you must build that LLVM/MLIR locally and point CMake at it.

### 1) Build the exact LLVM/MLIR revision (locally)

```bash
# Pick a workspace (optional)
mkdir -p ~/dev && cd ~/dev

# Clone the exact LLVM revision Catalyst expects
git clone https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project.git
cd llvm-project
git checkout 179d30f8c3fddd3c85056fd2b8e877a4a8513158

# Configure & build MLIR (Release is recommended)
cmake -S llvm -B build_llvm -G Ninja \
  -DLLVM_ENABLE_PROJECTS=mlir \
  -DLLVM_BUILD_EXAMPLES=OFF \
  -DLLVM_BUILD_TESTS=OFF \
  -DLLVM_INCLUDE_TESTS=OFF \
  -DLLVM_INCLUDE_EXAMPLES=OFF \
  -DLLVM_ENABLE_ASSERTIONS=ON \
  -DLLVM_ENABLE_ZLIB=FORCE_ON \
  -DLLVM_ENABLE_ZSTD=OFF \
  -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release \
  -DCMAKE_CXX_VISIBILITY_PRESET=default

cmake --build build_llvm --config Release

# Export these for your shell/session
export MLIR_DIR="$PWD/build_llvm/lib/cmake/mlir"
export LLVM_DIR="$PWD/build_llvm/lib/cmake/llvm"
```

### 2) Create a local env and build the plugin

```console
# From your repo root
cd /path/to/your/core/plugins/catalyst

# Create and activate a venv (optional)
uv venv .venv
. .venv/bin/activate

# Install Catalyst and build the plugin
uv pip install pennylane-catalyst==0.12.0

uv sync --verbose --active
  --config-settings=cmake.define.CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release
  --config-settings=cmake.define.Python3_EXECUTABLE="$(which python)"
  --config-settings=cmake.define.MLIR_DIR="$MLIR_DIR"
  --config-settings=cmake.define.LLVM_DIR="$LLVM_DIR"
```

### 3) Use the MQT plugin with your PennyLane code

The following code gives an example on how to use an MQT pass with PennyLane's Catalyst

```python3
import catalyst
import pennylane as qml
from catalyst.passes import apply_pass


@apply_pass("mqt.mqtopt-to-catalystquantum")
@apply_pass("mqt.mqt-core-round-trip")
@apply_pass("mqt.catalystquantum-to-mqtopt")
@qml.qnode(qml.device("lightning.qubit", wires=2))
def circuit() -> None:
    qml.Hadamard(wires=[0])
    qml.CNOT(wires=[0, 1])
    catalyst.measure(0)
    catalyst.measure(1)


@qml.qjit(target="mlir", autograph=True)
def module() -> None:
    return circuit()
```

## System Requirements

Building (and running) is continuously tested under Linux, MacOS, and Windows using the [latest available system versions for GitHub Actions](https://github.com/actions/runner-images).
However, the implementation should be compatible with any current C++ compiler supporting C++20 and a minimum CMake version of 3.24.

MQT Core relies on some external dependencies:

- [llvm/llvm-project](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project): A toolkit for the construction of highly optimized compilers, optimizers, and run-time environments.
- [PennyLaneAI/catalyst](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst): A package that enables just-in-time (JIT) compilation of hybrid quantum-classical programs implemented with PennyLane.

Note, both dependencies are currently restricted to a specific version.

CMake will automatically look for installed versions of these libraries. If it does not find them, they will be fetched automatically at configure time via the [FetchContent](https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/module/FetchContent.html) module (check out the documentation for more information on how to customize this behavior).

## Cite This

If you want to cite MQT Core's MLIR Plugin, please use the following BibTeX entry:

```bibtex
TODO
```

---

## Acknowledgements

The Munich Quantum Toolkit has been supported by the European
Research Council (ERC) under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (grant agreement
No. 101001318), the Bavarian State Ministry for Science and Arts through the Distinguished Professorship Program, as well as the
Munich Quantum Valley, which is supported by the Bavarian state government with funds from the Hightech Agenda Bayern Plus.

<p align="center">
  <picture>
    <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: dark)" srcset="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/.github/refs/heads/main/docs/_static/mqt-funding-footer-dark.svg" width="90%">
    <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/.github/refs/heads/main/docs/_static/mqt-funding-footer-light.svg" width="90%" alt="MQT Funding Footer">
  </picture>
</p>

Commit message:

fix: add device configuration utilities to prevent gate decomposition in MQT plugin

plugins/catalyst/README.md, after:

[//]: # "TODO: Update the banners"

[![PyPI](https://img.shields.io/pypi/v/mqt.core?logo=pypi&style=flat-square)](https://pypi.org/project/mqt.core/)
![OS](https://img.shields.io/badge/os-linux%20%7C%20macos%20%7C%20windows-blue?style=flat-square)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/license-MIT-blue.svg?style=flat-square)](https://opensource.org/licenses/MIT)
[![DOI](https://img.shields.io/badge/JOSS-10.21105/joss.07478-blue.svg?style=flat-square)](https://doi.org/10.21105/joss.07478)
[![CI](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/ci.yml?branch=main&style=flat-square&logo=github&label=ci)](https://github.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/actions/workflows/ci.yml)
[![CD](https://img.shields.io/github/actions/workflow/status/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/cd.yml?style=flat-square&logo=github&label=cd)](https://github.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/actions/workflows/cd.yml)
[![Documentation](https://img.shields.io/readthedocs/mqt-core?logo=readthedocs&style=flat-square)](https://mqt.readthedocs.io/projects/core)
[![codecov](https://img.shields.io/codecov/c/github/munich-quantum-toolkit/core?style=flat-square&logo=codecov)](https://codecov.io/gh/munich-quantum-toolkit/core)

<p align="center">
  <a href="https://mqt.readthedocs.io">
   <picture>
     <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: dark)" srcset="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/.github/refs/heads/main/docs/_static/logo-mqt-dark.svg" width="60%">
     <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/.github/refs/heads/main/docs/_static/logo-mqt-light.svg" width="60%" alt="MQT Logo">
   </picture>
  </a>
</p>

# MQT Core Catalyst MLIR Plugin

This sub-package of MQT Core provides a [Catalyst](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst) plugin for the [MLIR](https://mlir.llvm.org/) framework.
It allows you to use MQT Core's MLIR dialects and transformations within the Catalyst framework, enabling advanced quantum circuit optimizations and transformations.

TODO: extend this section with more details about the Catalyst plugin, its features, and how to use it.

If you have any questions, feel free to create a [discussion](https://github.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/discussions) or an [issue](https://github.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/issues) on [GitHub](https://github.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/core).

## Contributors and Supporters

The _[Munich Quantum Toolkit (MQT)](https://mqt.readthedocs.io)_ is developed by the [Chair for Design Automation](https://www.cda.cit.tum.de/) at the [Technical University of Munich](https://www.tum.de/) and supported by the [Munich Quantum Software Company (MQSC)](https://munichquantum.software).
Among others, it is part of the [Munich Quantum Software Stack (MQSS)](https://www.munich-quantum-valley.de/research/research-areas/mqss) ecosystem, which is being developed as part of the [Munich Quantum Valley (MQV)](https://www.munich-quantum-valley.de) initiative.

<p align="center">
  <picture>
   <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: dark)" srcset="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/.github/refs/heads/main/docs/_static/mqt-logo-banner-dark.svg" width="90%">
   <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/.github/refs/heads/main/docs/_static/mqt-logo-banner-light.svg" width="90%" alt="MQT Partner Logos">
  </picture>
</p>

Thank you to all the contributors who have helped make MQT Core a reality!

<p align="center">
<a href="https://github.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/graphs/contributors">
  <img src="https://contrib.rocks/image?repo=munich-quantum-toolkit/core" />
</a>
</p>

## Getting Started

`mqt.core.catalyst` is **NOT YET** available on [PyPI](https://pypi.org/project/mqt.core/).

Because `pennylane-catalyst` pins to a specific LLVM/MLIR revision, you must build that LLVM/MLIR locally and point CMake at it.

### 1) Build the exact LLVM/MLIR revision (locally)

```bash
# Pick a workspace (optional)
mkdir -p ~/dev && cd ~/dev

# Clone the exact LLVM revision Catalyst expects
git clone https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project.git
cd llvm-project
git checkout 179d30f8c3fddd3c85056fd2b8e877a4a8513158

# Configure & build MLIR (Release is recommended)
cmake -S llvm -B build_llvm -G Ninja \
  -DLLVM_ENABLE_PROJECTS=mlir \
  -DLLVM_BUILD_EXAMPLES=OFF \
  -DLLVM_BUILD_TESTS=OFF \
  -DLLVM_INCLUDE_TESTS=OFF \
  -DLLVM_INCLUDE_EXAMPLES=OFF \
  -DLLVM_ENABLE_ASSERTIONS=ON \
  -DLLVM_ENABLE_ZLIB=FORCE_ON \
  -DLLVM_ENABLE_ZSTD=OFF \
  -DCMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release \
  -DCMAKE_CXX_VISIBILITY_PRESET=default

cmake --build build_llvm --config Release

# Export these for your shell/session
export MLIR_DIR="$PWD/build_llvm/lib/cmake/mlir"
export LLVM_DIR="$PWD/build_llvm/lib/cmake/llvm"
```

### 2) Create a local env and build the plugin

```console
# From your repo root
cd /path/to/your/core/plugins/catalyst

# Create and activate a venv (optional)
uv venv .venv
. .venv/bin/activate

# Install Catalyst and build the plugin
uv pip install pennylane-catalyst==0.12.0

uv sync --verbose --active
  --config-settings=cmake.define.CMAKE_BUILD_TYPE=Release
  --config-settings=cmake.define.Python3_EXECUTABLE="$(which python)"
  --config-settings=cmake.define.MLIR_DIR="$MLIR_DIR"
  --config-settings=cmake.define.LLVM_DIR="$LLVM_DIR"
```

### 3) Use the MQT plugin with your PennyLane code

The MQT plugin provides device configuration utilities to prevent Catalyst from decomposing gates into unitary matrices, enabling lossless roundtrip conversions.

**Important:** Use `get_device()` from the MQT plugin instead of `qml.device()` directly:

```python3
import catalyst
import pennylane as qml
from catalyst.passes import apply_pass
from mqt.core.plugins.catalyst import get_device

# Use get_device() to configure the device for MQT plugin compatibility
# This prevents gates from being decomposed into unitary matrices
device = get_device("lightning.qubit", wires=2)


@apply_pass("mqt.mqtopt-to-catalystquantum")
@apply_pass("mqt.catalystquantum-to-mqtopt")
@qml.qnode(device)
def circuit() -> None:
    qml.Hadamard(wires=[0])
    qml.CNOT(wires=[0, 1])
    # Controlled gates will NOT be decomposed to matrices
    qml.ctrl(qml.PauliX(wires=0), control=1)
    catalyst.measure(0)
    catalyst.measure(1)


@qml.qjit(target="mlir", autograph=True)
def module() -> None:
    return circuit()


# Get the optimized MLIR representation
mlir_output = module.mlir_opt
```

**Alternative:** You can also configure an existing device:

```python3
from mqt.core.plugins.catalyst import configure_device_for_mqt

device = qml.device("lightning.qubit", wires=2)
device = configure_device_for_mqt(device)
```

## System Requirements

Building (and running) is continuously tested under Linux, MacOS, and Windows using the [latest available system versions for GitHub Actions](https://github.com/actions/runner-images).
However, the implementation should be compatible with any current C++ compiler supporting C++20 and a minimum CMake version of 3.24.

MQT Core relies on some external dependencies:

- [llvm/llvm-project](https://github.com/llvm/llvm-project): A toolkit for the construction of highly optimized compilers, optimizers, and run-time environments.
- [PennyLaneAI/catalyst](https://github.com/PennyLaneAI/catalyst): A package that enables just-in-time (JIT) compilation of hybrid quantum-classical programs implemented with PennyLane.

Note, both dependencies are currently restricted to a specific version.

CMake will automatically look for installed versions of these libraries. If it does not find them, they will be fetched automatically at configure time via the [FetchContent](https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/module/FetchContent.html) module (check out the documentation for more information on how to customize this behavior).

## Cite This

If you want to cite MQT Core's MLIR Plugin, please use the following BibTeX entry:

```bibtex
TODO
```

---

## Acknowledgements

The Munich Quantum Toolkit has been supported by the European
Research Council (ERC) under the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program (grant agreement
No. 101001318), the Bavarian State Ministry for Science and Arts through the Distinguished Professorship Program, as well as the
Munich Quantum Valley, which is supported by the Bavarian state government with funds from the Hightech Agenda Bayern Plus.

<p align="center">
  <picture>
    <source media="(prefers-color-scheme: dark)" srcset="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/.github/refs/heads/main/docs/_static/mqt-funding-footer-dark.svg" width="90%">
    <img src="https://raw.githubusercontent.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/.github/refs/heads/main/docs/_static/mqt-funding-footer-light.svg" width="90%" alt="MQT Funding Footer">
  </picture>
</p>
