docs/mlir/index.md, before:

# MLIR in the MQT

This part of the MQT explores the capabilities of the Multi-Level Intermediate Representation (MLIR) in the context of compilation for quantum computing.

We define multiple dialects, each with its dedicated purpose:

- The {doc}`MQTRef dialect <MQTRef>` uses reference semantics and is designed as a compatibility dialect that simplifies translations from and to existing languages such as Qiskit, OpenQASM, or QIR.

- The {doc}`MQTOpt dialect <MQTOpt>` uses value semantics and is mainly designed for running optimizations.

Both dialects define various transformation passes.

For intercompatibility, we provide {doc}`conversions <Conversions>` between dialects.
So far, this comprises a conversion from MQTOpt to MQTRef and one from MQTRef to MQTOpt.

:::{note}
This page is a work in progress.
The content is not yet complete and subject to change.
Contributions are welcome.
See the [contribution guidelines](contributing.md) for more information.
:::

```{toctree}
:maxdepth: 2
:caption: Table of Contents

MQTRef
MQTOpt
Conversions
```

Commit message:

🐉 Require LLVM 21 (#1180)
## Description

This PR raises the required LLVM version to 21. As a result, LLVM 21 is
also used in the CI now.

Fixes #1176

## Checklist:

- [x] The pull request only contains commits that are focused and
relevant to this change.
- [x] ~I have added appropriate tests that cover the new/changed
functionality.~
- [x] I have updated the documentation to reflect these changes.
- [x] I have added entries to the changelog for any noteworthy
additions, changes, fixes, or removals.
- [x] ~I have added migration instructions to the upgrade guide (if
needed).~
- [x] The changes follow the project's style guidelines and introduce no
new warnings.
- [x] The changes are fully tested and pass the CI checks.
- [x] I have reviewed my own code changes.

---------

Signed-off-by: Daniel Haag <121057143+denialhaag@users.noreply.github.com>

docs/mlir/index.md, after:

# MLIR in the MQT

This part of the MQT explores the capabilities of the Multi-Level Intermediate Representation (MLIR) in the context of compilation for quantum computing.

We define multiple dialects, each with its dedicated purpose:

- The {doc}`MQTRef dialect <MQTRef>` uses reference semantics and is designed as a compatibility dialect that simplifies translations from and to existing languages such as Qiskit, OpenQASM, or QIR.

- The {doc}`MQTOpt dialect <MQTOpt>` uses value semantics and is mainly designed for running optimizations.

Both dialects define various transformation passes.

For intercompatibility, we provide {doc}`conversions <Conversions>` between dialects.
So far, this comprises a conversion from MQTOpt to MQTRef and one from MQTRef to MQTOpt.

```{toctree}
:maxdepth: 2

MQTRef
MQTOpt
Conversions
```

:::{note}
This page is a work in progress.
The content is not yet complete and subject to change.
Contributions are welcome.
See the {doc}`contribution guide <contributing>` for more information.
:::

## Development

Building the MLIR library requires LLVM version 21.0 or later.
Our CI pipeline on GitHub continuously builds and tests the MLIR library on Linux, macOS, and Windows.
To access the latest build logs, visit the [GitHub Actions page](https://github.com/munich-quantum-toolkit/core/actions/workflows/ci.yml).
