<!-- Autogenerated by mlir-tblgen; don't manually edit -->

### `-cancel-consecutive-inverses`

_This pass searches for consecutive applications of gates and their inverses and cancels them._

This pass searches for applications of gates that are their own inverses. Walking down their def-use chain,
it then checks if the same gate is applied once again. In that case, the two gates are cancelled.

### `-merge-rotation-gates`

_This pass searches for consecutive applications of rotation gates that can be merged._

Consecutive applications of gphase, p, rx, ry, rz, rxx, ryy, rzz, and rzx are merged into one by adding their angles.
The merged gate is currently not removed if the angles add up to zero.

This pass currently does not affect xxminusyy, xxplusyy, u, and u2.

### `-mqt-core-round-trip`

_This pass performs a round trip to MQT Core's QuantumComputation and back_

This pass starts by extracting all quantum-computation-relevant operations and then
translates them into an MQT Core quantum computation, deleting all quantum operations
in the process. Then, the quantum computation is read in a second pattern and used
to generate new MLIR code from it.

This pass makes the following assumptions:

- Each module consists of a single function that uses `mqtopt` operations with just a single qubit register.
- All qubits are measured exactly once and the boolean measurement results are returned from the function in order.
- The first returned value is the `AllocOp` that constructs a qubit register.
- Measurements/Operations may only target a single qubit. Unitary operations may also use any number of (positive) controls.
- Supported operations are `x`, `y`, `z`, `h`, and `measure`.

### `-quantum-sink`

_This pass attempts to push down operations into branches for possible optimizations._

This pass searches for branch instructions and attempts to push instructions from previous branches into them.
